All right. Well, thank you, everyone. It is my pleasure to welcome you to the final day of BioC
2022 and to introduce Professor Minna Chetinkaya-Rundell, who is professor at Duke
and affiliated at University of Edinburgh and also working with POSIT, and she'll be
telling us about the new product called Quarto. Thank you, Minna. Take it away.
All right. Thank you very much. Are you able to see and hear me okay?
Yeah? Are you able to see and hear me okay?
Yes. Okay, great. I'm seeing yeses. All right. Well, thank you for joining today,
and I am very excited to talk to you about Quarto. So, I have been sort of working with Quarto over
the last year, testing it out and teaching it to my students, and today, hopefully, I'll be able
to give you a nice overview for it. Before I get started, I want to acknowledge two people
who have been kind of critical in preparing this presentation. One of them is Julia Stewart-Lounds,
who is with Openscapes, who I'll talk about a bit more in my talk, but I've given a version of this
talk with her, and this is sort of my part of the talk, bringing in some of her ideas as well,
but she's been critical in kind of planning this talk out, and also the cute artwork that you're
going to see throughout the presentation is by Alison Horst, who has made these illustrations
for our talk and also open-sourced them, so you also can use these illustrations if you would like,
and they're available on her GitHub repository. All right. So, let's say hello to Quarto. You
might be wondering, you know, what is Quarto? Why is Quarto? So, I'm going to try to answer
that question for you and give you a few demos. So, Quarto unifies and extends the R Markdown
ecosystem. It unifies it for people who love R Markdown, and it extends it for people who don't
know R Markdown. So, what I mean by this is that if you are an R Markdown user, you are probably
familiar with, you know, all the packages associated with that system, and we want to just start
thinking about Quarto as what if we were able to bring the functionality from all of them
together and extending it. So, if you're not an R Markdown user or even not an R user and you
might be coming into this idea of creating reproducible documents that are publication
ready and that are web ready, you'll be able to see some features of Quarto that might be
useful for your workflows. So, what I'd like to do is I would like to actually start this poll.
So, if you are following along with my slides, which let me actually put the link up here, it's
bit.ly slash hello-quarto-bioc. I guess I never read that as bioc in my head before.
You should be able to do that, or alternatively, you can go to slido.com and then do the keyword
is Quarto and send in your results as do you use R Markdown? Maybe you use it all the time,
maybe you use it rarely, maybe you've never heard of it. And it will be interesting to see sort of
the results. I'm seeing, you know, three responses so far. So, if you would like to participate,
if you're listening along, go to slido.com slash Quarto and let's take a look to see
what the results look like. I'll come back to these perhaps at the end,
and there'll be one other poll, and so we can take a look at the results then too.
All right. So, at least we don't have anyone in the room who's never heard of it. So,
hopefully much of this presentation will feel quite familiar. So, Quarto is a new and open
scientific and technical publishing system. And the goal of kind of creating Quarto and bringing
it to you is to make the process of creating and collaborating dramatically better. So,
we're going to be talking about documents that you might be creating on your own,
but also talking about documents that you might be collaborating with colleagues and students
who might be coming from different backgrounds. Quarto natively works with many computing
languages. So, beyond R, you could be writing code chunks in Python or Observable or Julia,
and it's actually designed to accommodate computing languages that don't yet exist as well.
And so, all of this goes through the Quarto machinery and you can get a variety of outputs.
We could be talking about HTML, that is a single HTML page, or it could be a website
or a web book. We could be talking about PDF, anything from a simple formatted PDF document
to something like a journal article, which I'll give an example of as well.
Or you could be outputting to Word or PowerPoint as well. So, I am going to organize this
talk in four acts, share, collaborate, teach, and reimagine. And we're going to try to give
you an overview of Quarto and hopefully entice you to look into it more, because there's no way
I can demo all of the features in the time we have, but the goal is to provide an overview.
All right, so let's start with share. So, I am an educator, I'm a researcher, and I'm a developer
as well. And when I say educator, you might be thinking, well, maybe she's giving a lot of
lectures, that she's 24-7 in front of audiences' lectures. But actually, a lot of what I do
is in front of my computer, in front of my computing, creating materials to share with
the world, either that is with my students or with my colleagues. Sometimes I'm writing a slide deck
for a lesson, sometimes something like this that you're seeing. And sometimes I'm writing
documentation or I'm writing, creating a course website. Oftentimes, I am thinking web first.
I like to share all of the materials that I create openly and with an open license,
so others can use them, reuse them, adapt them, and learn from them. And web is a great, you know,
venue for that. But I also live in the confines of academia and kind of traditional journal
publishing, which means I need to get things to render to PDF quite often and need them to be
formatted according to a very specific format. And so, I need a system that will allow me to take
the same source code and output to these different formats as much as possible. And also,
the system needs to enable that I put my code and my prose in the same document so that I could be
developing these computational documents that are reproducible and that, you know,
kind of remove the paradigm of copying and pasting computer output from one thing to another.
And for the last decade, that thing has been R Markdown for me. I vividly remember USARC 2012,
where JJ Allaire and Yiwei Shi at their keynote introduced the Knitter package, which kind of
provides the backbone of R Markdown as it processes the executable code chunks in an R
Markdown document. And when I started hearing about the Knitter package, I realized that this
was a year into my teaching at Duke. So, my first year as a faculty member, a lot of what I do was
to create, you know, teaching materials. And I was sort of struggling with how to create materials
for teaching R, where I can bring in my code and have it be syntax highlighted in a particular way,
have my code and my output live in one place, so that if I made, say, one change in my lesson notes
and had to recompile them, I didn't have to copy and paste a bunch of stuff again. And Knitter
seemed like a great solution for this. Preceding that, I used to try to use Sweave and found it
quite difficult to work with and definitely impossible to teach to my introductory students.
So, as their keynote was going on at USARC 2012, I basically started converting my teaching notes
to it. I started converting my kind of the lab assignments that I was writing for my students,
and then started making slides with it as well. And by the end of their keynote, now that I had,
you know, half listened to them and half also, half also, like, create, started converting my
own materials, I realized this is actually pretty straightforward to use, that I don't think I should
just be using this to create my materials, but is there a way for me to be teaching R to my students,
my intro stat students, while also teaching them this reproducible paradigm and writing these
computational documents as well. And in fact, the following year, that's what I started doing.
And that's been a great kind of trajectory for my career, frankly, in terms of getting the work I do
out there and sharing with the world, as well as changing the way that I teach R.
So, I'm hoping that with that story, you might be thinking, okay, what do we do with Corto? Well,
if you stop kind of listening to me right now and just go to corto.org and do exactly what I was
saying I did at that keynote and start playing with Corto, I will not be offended. I will call
this keynote a success. But I do hope that you continue to listen a little bit, maybe with one
ear. And if you would like to just sit back and listen to the talk, if you go to bit.ly
hello-corto-bioc, you'll be able to see these slides. And if you sit back as I proceed through
the slides, they should be advancing for you as well. So, I started by saying Corto unifies the
R Markdown ecosystem. Let's talk about that a little bit. Here are a bunch of packages, package
hex logos that you might be familiar with, and you might be relying on for creating and sharing
your work. You might be making your slide decks in Shurangen, using Blogdown or Distil for making
websites or writing blogs, or the articles package for writing scientific articles.
Corto basically unifies the functionality from all of these packages into one command line
interface. So, instead of being an R package, it is a command line interface that kind of unifies
the functionality. So, when working with Corto, you sort of don't need to think about,
I need to do task X, and for that I need this particular R package. Rendering documents with
Corto, as long as you have defined the desired output format, will basically get you there.
So, some highlights of kind of this effort of unifying these packages, and also not just
unifying them, but in the process of working on unifying them, just discovering gaps in
functionality and perhaps inefficiencies in user experience and trying to better these.
There is a consistent implementation of attractive and handy features across outputs. So, when I say
outputs, I'm thinking a slide deck to a simple document to a book or a website. Things like
tab sets, code folding, syntax highlighting, all work in all formats. And not only do they all work,
you request them with the same syntax. So, going between formats, you don't need to change any of
your kind of code chunk options to get that desired output. Corto features more accessible
defaults, as well as a better support for accessibility. And it comes with guardrails
that are particularly helpful for new learners. So, for example, there is YAML completion to help
with defining the YAML for your document or your code chunks. It has informative syntax errors
that will kind of guide you in the right direction when you're making errors.
And for those of you who may not be coming to this from an R or R Markdown background,
it also has support for other languages like Python, Julia, Observable, and more. And the way
it does this is that in addition to Knitter, it allows for using the Jupyter engine for executable
code chunks. So, you might already be playing with Corto or you might be thinking, let's go ahead and
actually show me what Corto looks like. So, that's what I'm going to do next. And in order to do that,
I am going to open up my demo. And let's give it a go. So, what I have here is an R Markdown document.
And in that R Markdown document, it should look familiar to you. I have a YAML and some code
chunks. And let's knit that document to see what the output looks like. This should be familiar to
those of you who have used R Markdown before. In addition to my code, I can see my output.
I'm going to turn things to the visual editor. So, I did that by kind of changing from my source
editor to the visual editor on the top. And the visual editor gives you a slightly different
authoring experience that I find much preferable. It allows you to do things like bolding and
highlighting without writing R Markdown syntax. And I'll feature a few more kind of a few more
features of it as well. But if I was to knit this document, you'll see that the output stays the
same. So, the visual editor is just a preference in terms of authoring experience, not changing
the output. But now let's go ahead and change. I'm going to rename this to say Hello QMD. So,
this is going to become a Corto document. And let's go ahead and render. The content should be
exactly the same. The button has changed from knit to render. And we can see that the content
of the output is the same, but it has a slightly different style. I'm going to change my YAML to
say format instead of output. And that's basically how we change between different output types with
Corto. And so, going forward, we're going to change between those. I might want to make a PDF,
for example. And if I want to make a PDF, I am going to just change my format. And something I
really like is if you're using RStudio, you can basically see that PDF in the viewer as opposed
to in a pop-up window. So, let's go back to HTML. And let's start playing around with some chunk
options. So, we've defined them using the hash pipe as opposed to a character string up at top.
And let's say that I want to hide this chunk, but I want to do YAML. I can't remember the exact
chunk option. The YAML completion helps me by giving me suggestions. And if I render this
document now, I will see that that particular chunk is not printed out in my document anymore.
If I want to hide all of my chunk options, I can set basically what we used to know as
global chunk options up in my YAML through the execute field. And what's neat about that is,
I don't know, it's a syntax I've always found difficult to remember setting chunk options.
And this is something that will work with the Knitter engine as well as the Jupyter engine,
which we'll demo in a little bit. So, let's also think about these
new chunk options, which allow us to write each chunk option in a new line. I think they make
things like writing alt text, for example. So, alternative text for the visualizations we create
a lot easier because, you know, placing all of that text, alternative text, into
the older style chunk option would have been quite kind of tedious. And so, an alternative
text won't appear in the output, but we can see that it's in the HTML source code, which will be
accessible to screen readers. Now, let's change things up a bit. And let's make a slide deck.
I am only going to change my format, nothing in my content. And if I sort of reload my editor
and render, you'll see that each of those second level headers are going to be a new slide in my
deck. So, I'm able to move between formats really easily, really nimbly. My plot only has so little
space in that slide, so let's give it a little bit more breathing room. By simply adding another
header into my file, we'll call that plot or something like that, I'm able to move the rest
of the content to the next slide. I don't need to add other syntax to indicate slide breaks
that may then not work in a different format, something like a horizontal line.
Okay. So, I've demoed one document to a slide deck. Let's bring this back to a single document
and let's see if we can make a website in less than 10 minutes. If I want to do something like
a website, chances are I have more than one document. So, I'm going to create one more
document. And in this document, I am going to say, let's call it index.qmd and put some text into it.
I am specifically going to remove any computation from this document so we can feature two types.
And I'd recorded the demo earlier for another talk, so it says here's a demo site.
Now, I'm creating another text file, a YAML file that will allow me to bring these two things in
a Corto project. So, a corto.yaml and we're going to write some YAML on the fly. I'm going to define
that I'm creating a Corto project. The type of it is a website. And let's lay out our website.
I want a title for it. Maybe let's call it Corto. And let's say I want a navigation bar.
And in that navigation bar, I want the left on the left, I want my index.qmd and I also want
that hello.qmd, which we've been working with so far. I now have a Corto project that defines it
as a website. I'm going to restart my RStudio session to get that build tab to appear.
And I can render or preview my website. So, a render or a live preview of my website. Let's go
ahead and render it. So, we've brought these two documents together in this very simple minimal
YAML. And we basically have a website with multiple pages in it, which I think is a really
neat way of putting things together. And this would be exactly the same way if you were making
a book, for example. You'll see that there's an underscore site folder now. And that's basically
where the contents of my website is the HTML files that are the results of this render.
What's next? So, we have created a website. Let's think about the computation in the website. One of
my documents has some compute in it. And what I might want to do is say, please don't rerun
the compute in that file every time I want to re-create, re-render my website. You know, maybe
I'm writing some text. So, what I'm going to add here is a YAML option called freeze.
And what it does is it will basically freeze the results of my computation if I set it to true
and won't rerun them until I perhaps do something like re-render that particular
document again. And you can see that I now have a freeze folder in my files pane where those
computations are saved. It will also, a little bit later, allow me to re-render this website
in an environment that doesn't have R installed. So, we have prepared our website and now let's
publish it. I'm going to go to the terminal now and I'm going to run my cortopublish command.
And I'm going to publish it on a, let's go ahead and see if this will work,
on cortopub from my account. And I'm going to maybe call this hello-cortodemo. So,
cortopub is a new publishing kind of domain that you can, just like rpubs, if you've used it before.
And basically, I can publish directly from the terminal. If you are hearing of cortopub for the
first time, it is quite new and you might want to go claim a username for yourself. I was able to get
Mina. So, I basically have published my website as well. I think all of this is, you know, I didn't
have to worry about other places. I could also directly publish to things like GitHub pages
or Netlify or something, but obviously that would have required additional authentication. And I
think this is a really neat way of just, you know, publishing your documents as quickly as possible.
All right. So, let's go to kind of recap this. So, what we've seen here is that the corto-cli,
so the corto command line interface, is the one that's doing the orchestration of each step of
rendering. With rmarkdown, the rmarkdown package would do that. So, you would need to have r
installed on your system and r, the rmarkdown package would be doing the orchestration. With
corto, we have a QMD file that, depending on the code you have in that file, or in the execution
or in the execution kind of style you have chosen, uses either Knitter or Jupyter under the hood
to kind of run the code in the executable code chunks and create a plain text markdown document.
And then we rely on Pandoc to do the last bit of kind of putting everything together and give you
the outputs that you want. Corto also makes moving between formats straightforward. So,
I've shown you a single document, like the type of thing I regularly write. It's something like
a lesson one in kind of a lecture notes format, maybe in HTML. Next, I might say take that and
let's create some lecture slides from that. So, all I have to do is change the format in the YAML.
And next, I might say I have maybe one of these and a couple more that I'm going to add on to it,
create a YAML file that will call all of these and put them together as a website.
It also facilitates open sharing, because even when it might be so easy to create documents
locally, and even if you are going to openly license them, if sharing them and publishing
them openly is a hassle, chances are many folks are going to choose not to go there.
And I think that tooling that makes it easy to share what you do with the world on the web is
incredibly useful. And it's not just useful for you, but to the world, because it facilitates
open sharing of knowledge and learning for reuse. And being able to kind of get accustomed to using
tooling that allows for this, I think can help for this culture shift where we're creating openly
licensed materials and sharing them as early as possible.
In the next act, we're going to talk a little bit about collaboration. I've talked a lot about
myself so far. I write slide decks. I write documents. But I obviously don't operate in a
silo disconnected from others. I collaborate with a lot of people, and you probably do as well.
Well, I collaborate with a lot of people, and some of those people don't use R. Many
scientists actually use Python, too. So, I'd like to ask you another Slido question. So, again,
you can go to the link for the slides, or you can go to Slido.com, and then hashtag Corto.
And I'm curious, are languages other than R part of your life? You might be thinking, yes,
I code in R, and also some other language. It could be Python, but something else as well.
For me, it is I code in R, but I also have collaborators who code in some other language.
And it's possible that for some of you, no other languages than R are part of your life.
So, go ahead and answer this, and we'll come back to the results sort of at the end.
What is really neat about Corto is that it enables collaborating across coding languages.
So, here you can see a Corto YAML, just like the one we have created. But this is from my
colleague, Julia Lowndes' website that she has kind of put together for kind of a group that
she's running. And we can see that there's a lot more pages than the two that we created.
Some of those are QMD files, some of them are Python notebooks, and some of them are RMD files,
and some of them are plain Markdown files. So, the fact that we don't need everyone to kind of
change their tooling, but actually can come together and bring whatever they have created
in an environment that they feel comfortable with, I think is a really neat feature of Corto.
So, I think I saw a comment that said the poll isn't working. Maybe I'll try to remedy that at
the end of our talk. It's supposed to be pausing now. Corto enables contributing from our current
tools. So, you could be working in the RStudio IDE, which is personally my preferred place to
be writing code. But you could also edit Corto documents in Jupyter. You could edit them in VS
code, or you could edit them directly on GitHub, for example. And what is really neat about this
is that, you know, folks choose where they want to be writing code or where they want to be writing
prose and get comfortable with it, right? And when they basically get comfortable with that,
asking them to change where they're doing their work, just to collaborate with you,
is often faced with resistance. People want to kind of stay at their own home and wish
that their collaborator would come to them. So, an alternative is to say you can stay at
your own home and you can collaborate with me on the same project from wherever you are.
Let's look at one other demo here,
where we're going to be editing that same site from Jupyter.
Okay, so I am in JupyterHub right now, and you can see that on the side, the same files that we
created earlier with the website that we have. We're going to do a live preview of this. So,
I've run Corto preview in the terminal, and that gives me a URL where I can go and see the results
of my website. And generally, you know, keeping these side by side is a nice way of sort of
editing your document live and then seeing the changes. So, we're able to, and note that this
Jupyter environment does not have R installed right now. So, it's the freeze feature from earlier
that's allowing us to re-render or preview the website without running the R code again.
And here, we have a Jupyter notebook that basically has very similar content to that first
hello.qmd file that we had created. We have some text in Markdown, and we also have some code
to recreate a similar analysis. And the code chunks have Python code in them.
So, we're going to run one of these code chunks, and we can see the results of it directly in the
notebook. And let's go ahead and render that plot as well. And now, we're going to save the
results. So, we've rendered, executed the code in the notebook, and we have saved the results.
And now, we're going to go back to that YAML file where we had said put these two documents
together and add this third document into it. So, that is hello in Python. And this time,
it's not a QMD file, but it is an IPython notebook. And let's go ahead and watch to
see if things are rendered again. And if we go back to our website, we can see that we have
added that third file. And so, this could be a collaborator adding to your project basically
without leaving their home. They're able to use their preferred computing language, and they're
able to use their own preferred computing environment. Let's take a look at some other
things. So, we've talked about these code chunk options that we can add using the hash pipe.
The same syntax works in Jupyter as well. So, we might add a caption to this figure. So,
let's go ahead and run it. And you'll see that the caption is going to be visible on the output. So,
if we kind of refresh this, you can see that the caption is visible above our plot, but it is not
in the Jupyter notebook. So, it's not getting in the way of the notebook,
but it is present in the output.
We're going to demo adding one other chunk option, and this would be something for what if we wanted
to move this plot to the margin. So, kind of a style that many folks prefer where their plots
appear in the margin. So, this allows us to basically change the layout of things to our
document in a way that would not necessarily be possible to achieve just within the Jupyter
notebook, but we are able to get that in our rendered output. So, if your screen is wide
enough, it's basically moving it to the margin.
So, I think, okay. And one other thing that I'll show here is that we can actually
convert between IPython notebooks and QMD files, which might be helpful if you are, for example,
wanting to check this into Git, because this way you get kind of a plain text syntax for your files.
All right. So, going back to our slides, we've talked about kind of collaborating across languages,
but I want to talk a little bit about the teaching implications of this as well.
And I'm going to do this with an example from a student of mine. So, this is Holland Stem,
who is an art history and visual media studies student who was in my class in last spring,
last spring, where she had only one semester of an interdata science class where she had
learned R Markdown, and this was her second class, a regression class, where we were using Quarto.
And she is working on a pretty quantitative art history thesis where she's looking at
representation in art history textbooks and actually measuring kind of each of the pieces
of art featured in the textbook and joining that with demographic information about the
artists as well. And she was working on a thesis that is basically, that is basically quite
quantitative and had a bunch of code and a prose in it. Even though in our class, each of our,
we teach Quarto, you know, every single assignment is a single Quarto document,
and we don't end up writing something pretty extensive like a thesis that brings a bunch of
documents together. But she was able to pretty quickly level up from writing a single document
to being able to bring them together because we're able to do that with a single YAML file,
which in my opinion has been a challenge for students who learn R Markdown so easily,
but then have, you know, struggling with that leveling up to writing more extensive things,
especially if they need to worry about kind of running, thinking about, I don't want to write my,
render my code every time I make changes to my text. And so as a side note, if you are interested
in the data set that she collected with another student, Sarah Lemus, they've actually packaged
this up as a package called art history, and you could get a sense of that. But sort of kind of the
moral of the story that I wanted to tell here is that this leveling up was possible for a student
in their second semester of statistics with a very minimal introduction to Corto, and to me
that has been a very pleasant surprise for teaching with it. So next I want to show you a few things
about teaching with Corto, and we'll try to kind of speed this up a bit. So the first thing that's
really neat is that you can just render Corto documents in RStudio. There is no additional
install necessary, and to me that's really, really nice. But beyond that, you can do things like
adding, linking to documentation directly by adding a YAML option called code link, and what this will
do is in the rendered document, every single function, regardless of which package they come
from, is going to link to its documentation. If it can find a package down website, it'll link there,
otherwise it'll link to kind of standard R documentation for it. And this comes with, you
know, very minimal kind of, very minimal work on your part, which is really neat. Other things that
I create with Corto are obviously, oh, so let's show the, sorry, the YAML errors as well.
Let's try to make a mistake here, like it's hard to make a mistake because it gives you so many
suggestions. But let's say that I did make a syntax error and render the document. The syntax,
the errors are very human readable, and it even gives you some suggestions around how to
fix them, which I think is very helpful for new learners. I'll show a few other things that are in,
so we're going to change this to reveal JS to make some, make our slides from the same document,
and I'm going to add a couple things. So, you can see, for example, that we have,
you can see here, for example, that we have the, sorry, I just realized that my computer is dying.
Apologies for that, just plugging in now. Okay, there is a kind of a sidebar that allows you to
go between things, and also you can do a PDF export, which I think is really nice. Students
always ask for, can I get a printable version of your slides? Other things that are really nice
that I found is this chalkboard feature, which allows you to kind of annotate your slides as you
go, and in the past I've struggled with this sort of thing, you know, needing to bring an iPad with
me to write over things, and I think it's really neat to be able to do this on the fly, and you can
actually save these things as well, and you can get like a chalkboard to actually write on, which is
nice when a student asks a question that you otherwise, you know, don't have space to expand
on in the slides. I'm going to proceed a bit. There's some really neat features here, but I
wanted to show you one other thing, because we've been talking about HTML output a lot,
but what about the research side of things? So, if I can, there are Korto templates for
a growing number of journal styles, so here I'm going to use JASA, for example, that I can
install. This is basically adding something like an extension to my project, and asks me,
do you trust the author of this template? Asks you to give it a directory name,
and now let's take a look here at the files that it has created for us.
I'm going to, you know, adjust my title. I'm going to adjust my, sort of, my
author name for it, and we're going to render this document,
and you can see, if you have submitted JASA articles, this format should be familiar to you.
The fact that we're able to get to this so nicely and quickly, I think, is really neat. So, now I'm
like, okay, I'm going to go and, you know, start writing my content, actually, and if I wanted to
change my journal style to something else, that would just be a change in the YAML.
All right. So, I think that I'm going to wrap things up quickly here, because we are running
out of time, which is a huge shame, but I'll take maybe two more minutes to wrap things up,
and then we should have plenty of time for questions. So, the last thing I want to talk
about is going beyond what you might be doing, what you might be used to doing, and for this,
I want to give a huge shout out and credit to my friend and colleague,
Julia Lowndes, who leads this effort called Openscapes with her partner, Aaron Robinson,
and their model is to mentor scientific teams kind of towards a culture of open science,
and I would like to read this quote from Ilana Fenwick, who is an Openscapes member.
Because of Openscapes, I have renewed hope in how we can bring about a kinder future in science,
I have renewed hope in how we can bring about a kinder future in science. I see a commitment in
the open science community to bridging the gaps where we've left members of our community behind,
and it inspires me. So, the work that, the sort of work that Openscapes is doing
and is inspired by things like this. This is an excerpt from the Fay lab manual, which basically
says you are coming into our lab, you are going to be a member of our research group, and you
might be coming from a variety of backgrounds in terms of what you've seen as part of data science,
as part of data analysis. They're an ecology lab, and it basically makes the implicit explicit by
saying here's our code of conduct, these are your expectations, but also here's where we keep the
files, here is where we run our code. And what the goal here is to be able to get people to contribute
to authoring of things at the very beginning, even if they're coming with a minimal background.
And so, how are we going to be able to do this? One way that working with Corto and RStudio
supports this is that visual editor. So, I'm not going to play for you the whole demo, but I am only
going to show you one thing that I think will be of super interest to everyone, which is adding a
citation to our document. So, what I'm going to do here is I am going to kind of add this at symbol,
and it is linked to my Zotero, and I am able to with some just by searching through my Zotero
library, insert a citation directly in the visual editor, and when I render my document, I'm able to
see that it has created a bib file for me, and it has basically added that citation to my document.
It's things like this that basically get the minutiae of the syntax out of the way and allow
people to focus on the content and be able to contribute as quickly as possible. I can even do
this with something like a DOI search. So, if I have the DOI for a document or a paper that I am citing,
I can simply place that in there, and it will go through and search through the DOI,
kind of, search the DOI for me and insert the citation, and it's things that ease, I think,
authoring and collaboration like this that, you know, moves things forward, and personally, I really
enjoy being able to write like this. So, we are going to, I'm going to wrap this up with a big
thank you to joining this morning. I hope that this has been a good overview and introduction
to Corto. Once again, the slides are at this link, hello-corto-bioci, and if you scroll to
the next slide, you'll be able to see a bunch of resources. You can even get the source code for the
demo that I, the website that I created, if you wanted to pick things up right there, and I'd be
happy to answer any questions. Thank you very much.
Audience here. Are there questions in the audience?
Yes.
Hello. Very nice talk. I was wondering, with anything new like this, I feel like there's
usually something that you really wish you could do that still isn't easy. I was wondering if you
could share if there's something like that. Yeah. So, for example, this, the journal
article templates that I just mentioned are very new. So, if you had asked me this question
like last week, I would have said, well, some of the journals are implemented, but not the ones I
submit to. Those are developed as extensions, and I think that that, for me, has been nice to
see that both the Corto development team has been responsive, but also the community has been
building them. I don't mean to say Corto is not missing anything, but I've had the pleasure of
making, you know, requests for certain things, and I kind of seeing them in action. I think that
things like generating slides, for example, when you want to do a lot of styling, I find that I
still have to write CSS, which I'm not very good at myself, and I would like some of that stuff to
be more built into Corto. But aside from that, so far, I haven't encountered anything that is
in no way to say the system is complete, just for my workflows. It has been, I've been able to like
open issues and get them resolved so far, and I encourage you all to do the same, because this is
kind of baby ages of Corto, and I think the team developing it is kind of really looking out for
things people are struggling with so they can work on those next.
I have another question from the floor.
Hi, good morning, at least it's morning here. So thank you, this is great. You talk a lot about
education, maybe it's the artwork that also makes me think of this, but do you have any intentions
for getting this to a level that youth could learn from this as well?
So that's a really nice question, and let me clarify, when you say youth, do you mean
below the college level? Yes, yeah, I have young kids, so I'm thinking of them.
Yes, yes, so I think that's a really good question. While I have limited experience
with that, I have ran a few workshops for high school students, a few kind of conferences,
StatFest that ASA runs, which is like a diversity-focused conference. I've done that there
with some high school students, and I think that this sort of thing, with the visual editor
particularly, is entirely, I think a real good way of introducing students to code. In the past,
what I have used are LearnR tutorials for that, and the idea there was, I know that you can't do
real data science outside of something like an IDE, but can you give them a taste of something
outside of that? And I think the answer is yes, and the reason why I had kept things out of the
RStudio IDE and done a LearnR tutorial was that I didn't also want to teach them markdown syntax,
and I think with the visual editor, how it distinguishes between what's prose and what is
code so distinctly, it would be worthwhile to try to bring that audience into that to see how they
react to it. I personally have not had experience with that, but I will tell you that if you follow
along with some of the stats education work that goes around, particularly presented at conferences
like US COTS and ECOTS, there's always a group of people who are working with that crowd, and
they're working on really neat things. Hi, I have a question about the collaboration. So you showed
how you could, I guess, have people, different people, say, contribute different files, like,
you know, somebody puts their Python notebook in this or whatever when you're building the website,
which seems really interesting. I was wondering if there's any provision for, like, collaboratively
editing the same document. So I'm imagining something like a Google Docs type interface
where people are contributing to one document, or is it currently file-based in the sense that,
like, you'd be needing something like Git on the back end to manage multiple contributions to one
document? Yeah, great question. What I showed would have assumed something like Git, so you're
absolutely right in that. When it comes to collaborative editing, so I have two answers
for this. If you are working in RStudio, there is a collaborative editing functionality that's
being developed for RStudio Cloud. It is my hope that it goes beyond just RStudio Cloud,
and it's, I think, still a beta feature, but I would hope that in due time we're going to see a
nice implementation of that in something like RStudio Server. I am not very well-versed,
I'm afraid, in, like, VS Code. I don't use it regularly, but I feel like I follow enough people
on Twitter that I see things that they share. So I think, I believe in VS Code you can do
collaborative editing. Don't quote me on that, but I think it's worth googling, and if you don't
code in VS Code, obviously that may not be very helpful, but ultimately the fact that Corto is,
like, authoring environment independent, I think means that you're not stuck in RStudio in the
sense that if another editor has these sorts of bells and whistles that are useful for your
workflow, you can take what has been developed at the command line interface level and use it there,
and that portability hopefully, you know, allows for exploring
some other solutions that might be useful in this case.
And then we're going to have to close, so we have Leo.
Hi, Minu, this is Leonardo. I'm very enthused by your presentation on Corto, so do you know if
the vignette builders or in R are going to allow Corto vignettes? And then my second question would
be, can you have two Corto files where they share the R code but you don't execute it in both at the same time, so you have, like, a HTML and a presentation that have the same R code behind it, but you don't have to spend the computational power to render it twice?
So, question number one, vignette builders, I do not know the answer to this question. However, I think this is a good opportunity to point folks to where a good place for asking questions is. On the Corto GitHub repository, there's a GitHub discussions feature, so you can just have a question. It doesn't have to be an issue like a software bug.
So, if you go to the Corto website and click on help, it will get you there, and that is a fantastic venue for that question, and I apologize that I don't have an answer for it.
For the second question of having a single R source code for multiple kind of QMD files, if that's a workflow that you prefer, you can have include statements in your Corto file. So, it's just two curly braces and then include. And so, the way I would solve that problem is put the R code that you want in a third file that you then include where necessary, and that's a great way to do it.
And you can do that at the level, but I imagine it's going to be interspersed through the text. So, I think you would want those includes statements interspersed through your text as well.
I wish we had a little more time. Maybe I'll ask one more question, though. This has to do with books and how many examples there are of volumes that are satisfactorily produced in the Corto framework that are monographs and may include cross references between chapters and so forth, something we have found difficult to deal with.
Yeah, so there are plenty actually, let me link to, and I'll put this in the chat here for folks to see. So, on the Corto website, you'll be able to go to the gallery where we've collected books and a handful of these also have PDF output as well. Personally, something I've struggled with in the past has been making things look good in HTML and in PDF, and I think that's a great way to do it.
So, you'll be able to see examples of that. Corto is quite new, so the number is not in hundreds, but there is a growing number of them, and hopefully that gallery is inspirational in terms of solving that. Cross references and stuff, I've demoed that at the very end with the visual editor, not that you have to use the visual editor, but the same cross reference style works, whether it is a single document or it's a book or a website, which I think perhaps would be a good way to do it.
And I think perhaps resolves some of those challenges with adding references to a book.
Fantastic. I'm going to have to close the session because some of us have to change buildings. Thank you so much for a wonderful presentation.
Thank you.
Have a good day.